JUDY WOODRUFF: Aside from the
many international issues before
President Trump this week, his
first major push on domestic
policy is facing an uphill
climb in the Senate.
John Yang has this checkup.
JOHN YANG: When last we left
the saga of the Republicans'
attempt to repeal and replace
the Affordable Care Act,
Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell didn't have
the votes for the Senate
bill, so lawmakers headed home
for the Fourth of July recess.
Where do things stand
as the recess ends?
Let's turn to our
own Lisa Desjardins.
So, Lisa, has this week off
helped or hurt McConnell's
efforts to get this bill passed?
LISA DESJARDINS: It has not
helped, and that has hurt.
We see some Republicans who
are not usually in the middle
of these situations, like John
Hoeven of North Dakota, for
example, meeting not just with
constituents, but with hospital
administrators, those
kinds of people.
And he came away with those
meetings having, stressing
problems with the bill.
Then, yesterday, Mitch
McConnell, the majority
leader, spoke to a
rotary club in Kentucky.
And he said this quote that
got a lot of attention:
"If my side is unable
to agree on an adequate
replacement, then some kind
of action with regard to the
private health insurance market
must occur.
No action is not
an alternative."
His office insists he said
things like this before,
but the timing is key.
This was a bill that was
supposed to be voted on already.
John, leadership sources tell
me they would still like a new
revised bill next week, maybe
a vote the following week.
But that seems unclear now
if it will really happen.
JOHN YANG: Seems like Mitch
McConnell was sending a message.
So, who are the key players that
he was sending that message to?
LISA DESJARDINS: You
got it exactly right.
We talked so much
about moderates before.
Now it's all about
the conservatives.
He was saying to conservatives,
we have to revise these bills,
or we have lost our shot
of having anything
as Republicans.
Let's compare two conservatives
who spoke in town halls
yesterday's sound bites, first
from Texas Senator Ted Cruz.
SEN.
TED CRUZ (R), Texas: 2010,
2014, and 2016, repealing
Obamacare was front and center.
Now, I recognize that some folks
may not agree with that, but
the voters, repealing Obamacare
was the single biggest factor
producing a Republican House,
a Republican Senate, and
I think ultimately a
Republican president.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, that's
an animated Ted Cruz.
He is trying to change this
revised bill to try and get
it across the finish line.
But compare that with
Kansas Senator Jerry Moran.
SEN.
JERRY MORAN (R),
Kansas: I believe in the
legislative process that
allows public debate,
public discussions,
testimony, amendments
offered by all senators.
The bill comes to the Senate
floor, amendments offered by all
senators, and figure out where
there are 60 votes to pass
something that is so important
to so many Americans.
LISA DESJARDINS: How about
that key number, 60 votes?
That means Democrats would
need to be to be involved.
And that's coming
from a conservative.
JOHN YANG: So, what
are the options?
What can Mitch McConnell try
to do to get the votes he needs
to pass a bill in the Senate?
LISA DESJARDINS: There are no
easy options left, but there
are three options that seem
to define the possible paths
right now for Mr. McConnell.
The first is to revise the bill.
That's what we have
been talking about.
They do hope to offer
a revised bill soon.
But can it get enough votes?
Unclear.
The second is a full repeal.
That's something Rand
Paul and Ted Cruz want.
However, with that full repeal
would come a replacement later.
And many of my sources
in the Republican Party
say that is too risky.
JOHN YANG: It's also an
option that the president
raised last week.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's correct.
But this doesn't seem
to have the votes right
now in the Senate.
Then the third option would be
smaller fixes to the Affordable
Care Act, something that
stabilizes the market
and fixes what people
think are problems now.
That would involve
the Democrats as well.
JOHN YANG: That would keep ACA
essentially as it this, just
make little nicks and cuts
around the edges.
LISA DESJARDINS: Potentially.
It would be a much smaller
bill at that point.
JOHN YANG: That's what
the Democrats want.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JOHN YANG: So, as we sit here,
with the Senate about to come
back next week, what are the
odds?
What are the chances?
What does your gut tell you
about the chances of, A, the
Senate passing something and, if
that happens, B, getting
something to the president's
desk for his signature?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, I have
the sense that almost no one
knows exactly what's going to
happen now, but I would say,
given that and given the way
the Senate works, the odds are
long, both on a bill passing
the Senate and even longer on
it getting to the president's
desk, as things stand right now.
JOHN YANG: But the odds are
good you're going to have a busy
week next week, when the Senate
comes back.
LISA DESJARDINS: I think so.
JOHN YANG: Thanks, Lisa.